---
layout: page
title: About
subtitle: Our aim is to accelerate the collective uptake of open and reproducible research practices in academia
---

### Academia is characterised by a collective action problem

It's fair to say that the current state of academic culture is in a right mess. [Toxic work environments]((https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2018/may/18/academia-exploitation-university-mental-health-professors-plagiarism)) are driving researchers to mental collapse at frightening rates. [Powerful publishing corporations](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0127502) lock up our work behind expensive paywalls and prevent the public -- who typically pay for the research in the first place -- from reaping the benefits. [Journals prioritise novelty at the expense of reliability](https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.3000117), encouraging questionable research practices and decreasing the reliability of the literature. Universities offer short (often one year-long) postdoc contracts, forcing early career researchers to hop around the world as they chase the ever-dwindling dream of a permanent position in academia. The list of complaints goes on, and -- in the light of the recent COVID-19 pandemic -- the situation may well get worse before it gets any better.

Ask researchers who is to blame for all of these problems, and many will point their fingers at the institutions, publishers, or funders who govern us. But dig a little closer, and it becomes clear that we researchers are as much to blame for this dysfunctional culture as any other stakeholder. Commercial journals only survive because we keep donating our valuable labour to them, in the form of articles (for which we voluntarily sign over copyright) and expert reviews (which we conduct without renumeration or credit). Universities only offer short contracts because we keep accepting them, albeit out of fear that there are no other options. Toxic work environments only exist because we keep competing to escalate a publication arms race, rather than cooperating to share knowledge and collaborate more effectively. Every time a researcher engages in one of these actions, they reinforce a culture that hurts their broader community -- and ultimately themselves, by extension. Sure, the effects of any single action (e.g., publishing a paper in a 'prestigious' commercially-owned journal) may be relatively minor, and could even be forgiven as a necessary step in a research career, but add all these actions up and you have the recipe for a never-ending cultural monster that is hell-bent on eating its own tail.

The question then is: how to break this vicious cycle? Again, many researchers will point at institutions, publishers, and funders to demand change. And of course, these stakeholders have an important role to play in reshaping academic culture moving forward. But at the same time, these stakeholders have their own collective action problems to deal with, and may not be forthcoming in effective solutions any time soon. Take universities, for example, which are ranked according to global metrics based on the number of publications in 'prestigious' legacy journals (among other things). Can we really expect any single university to stop incentivising their researchers to publish in these journals rather than, say, a completely free and open access system, if doing so will place them at a competitive disadvantage and likely cost them their biggest source of revenue in student fees? Similarly, corporate publishers are, at the end of the day, businesses, and only responsible to their shareholders. OR JOURNAL REPUTATIONS? Can we expect commercial publishers to herald in the new cultural shift, if it will hurt their bottom dollar and share price? All signs point to no (and, indeed, there's a [long history of publishers subverting progress in academia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Cost_of_Knowledge)). In 2002, Parks wrote about the ['Faustian grip' of academic publishing](https://doi.org/10.1080/1350178022000015122) that would likely prevent the various stakeholders in academia from fully embracing free, online dissemination of research -- otherwise known as the open access movement -- for the foreseeable future. Unfortunately, nearly 20 years later, his prognostation has proven all-too-correct. Perhaps even worse, the Open Access movement has been co-opted from its original subversive roots to become a mechanism to lock in publisher profits via author-processing charges.

How then, do we learn from the past and create a path forward that benefits researchers, rather than the incumbent stakeholders. Imagine, for a second, that every single researcher in the world decided that from tomorrow, they would no longer support legacy journals. Overnight, their  

~~~~~
[FROM UKRN BLOGPOST]
Open research practices have the potential to benefit the entire research community, but could be perceived by some researchers as a threat to their career under the ‘publish-or-perish’ paradigm. For example, the widespread sharing of data and code could allow researchers to validate and build on each others’ work more efficiently, thus saving countless hours of duplicated effort, but some individuals may worry that doing so will place them at a competitive disadvantage. Similarly, the widespread support for platinum open access systems could drastically decrease publication costs and place the control of scholarly communication in the hands of the research community, but individuals may worry that these outlets do not confer sufficient prestige to ensure their survival in a competitive job market. Academic reform thus reflects a ‘collective action problem’, whereby a group of individuals fail to reach a preferable state due to conflicting interests at the personal level. Problems of this kind can often be resolved through ‘collective action’, which occurs when the community in question acts in a coordinated manner to increase their standing while protecting each others’ interests (e.g., a labour strike; Olson, 1965). Although the internet has proven to be a valuable tool for organising collective action throughout distributed communities (e.g., Kickstarter, Collaction), the global research community has yet to embrace this strategy as a potential catalyst for positive cultural change in academia. 

**The vision**\
Project Free Our Knowledge aims to create positive cultural change by organising collective action in the research community. Using their [website](https://www.freeourknowledge.org/), researchers can signal their intentions to adopt progressive research behaviours *if and when there is a pre-determined level of support in the community*. Pledges remain inactive and anonymous if the threshold is not met, thus protecting individuals from potential repercussions. Once the threshold is met, however, the pledging community will be revealed on the website and directed to carry out the action in unison, thus protecting one another's interests as they drive cultural change together. Campaign targets will be modest in the short term, e.g., asking hundreds of researchers to post a preprint or complete a preregistration. But in time, as the movement grows, campaigns could grow increasingly bolder in both size and scope, eventually culminating in widespread systemic change and optimising the speed with which we can make progress on important issues of our time (e.g., pandemics, climate change).

**How to get involved**\
The project is now open for community input and collaboration via [Github](https://github.com/FreeOurKnowledge/community), where any researcher can [propose a new campaign or idea](https://github.com/FreeOurKnowledge/community/issues/new/choose) and comment on previous proposals. The goal of this process is to design campaigns that are most likely to gain traction throughout diverse research communities, and so we invite you to look through the [campaign proposals](https://github.com/FreeOurKnowledge/community/issues) (e.g., , comment on or react to (e.g., thumbs up) any campaigns that interest you, or propose a new campaign for something that aligns with your interests. The campaign proposals will then be [peer-reviewed](https://github.com/FreeOurKnowledge/community/issues/15) prior to being posted on the [website](https://www.freeourknowledge.org/) to gather pledges.

You can also find out more about Project Free Our Knowledge and connect with the team via [Twitter](https://twitter.com/projectFOK), [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/projectFOK), [Github](https://github.com/FreeOurKnowledge/community), [email](mailto: info@freeourknowledge.org), and their [mailing list](http://eepurl.com/dFVBVz). 
