---
layout: page
title: Frequently Asked Questions
---

#### How do collective action campaigns work?
**1. Propose**. Anyone can propose a collective action campaign that takes the form *"We will all do X (the 'action') when Y people (the 'threshold') have pledged"*. Campaigns can be developed using the issues feature in our [Github repository](https://github.com/freeourknowledge/website/issues) -- just add comments or reactions to any proposals that interest you (we'll use this to guide which campaigns get posted first) or create a new campaign by clicking 'new issue' and filling in the campaign proposal template. 
**2. Pledge**. Once the campaign details have been ironed out and we've seen some traction in the community, we'll post it here on the website and invite researchers to take the pledge by filling in the pledge form. Note that *pledges remain inactive and anonymous until the predefined threshold is met in their research field*, meaning that individuals are protected from any possible risk or retribution until they have the support of their community. Pledgees can act on their pledge early, if they so desire, and/or choose to make their pledge public prior to it activating.
**3. Act**. If and when the threshold of pledges is met, we'll post the names of all those who have pledged on our website and direct everyone to carry out the pledge in unison, from that day forward. Any campaigns that fail to reach threshold within a reasonable period of time (e.g., one year) will be taken down to make space for other campaigns and prevent unexpected surprises years down the track.
**4. Evaluate**. Finally, campaigns that have reached threshold and triggered pledges will be assessed throughout their lifespan to evaluate their impact. Pledge details will be updated when our community members have successfully completed (or broken, if appropriate) their pledge, for example using a different colour to indicate a pledge being completed. We plan to use this data to (a) motivate pledgees to follow through with their pledge, (b) inform future campaign designs to ensure maximum impact, and (c) showcase the commitment of our community toward positive action in academia.

#### Why focus on simple actions (e.g., preregistration) and small thresholds (e.g., 100 pledges)? 
On a practical note, we're still developing our processes, and starting small with simple actions like this gives us the best chance of reaching the threshold, rolling out the pledge activation phase, and assessing impacts once the campaign has run its course. On a more strategic note, our goal is to build a large community of researchers who act together to solve systemic problems in academia through collective action. Building this community will not happen instantaneously, and will likely require evidence that our community is committed to action. By starting small and collecting pledges across multiple campaigns at once, we give people the opportunity to demonstrate commitment to their pledges, which can then bolster confidence in our community and attract other people to the movement. In time, with data to show that our community follows through on their pledges, we plan to host ever-larger and bolder campaigns that push for widespread systemic change throughout academia. From little things, big things grow. 

#### Why do I need 100 (or X) of my peers to sign before I act? 
You don't! If you'd like to get started early, by all means do. But even if you're planning to preregister your next study anyway, there are still multiple benefits to signing this pledge. By signing this pledge, you'll be (a) signalling your commitment to open science practices (both to authorities and your peers), (b) increasing accountability (as we'll be assessing compliance with the pledges down the track), (c) helping to motivate others who may still be on the fence about preregistration or have some reservations given their current circumstances, and (d) bringing the campaign closer to the threshold, which will generate publicity and help grow our community of change-makers. Finally, if/when your pledge activates and you follow through with your pledge, you'll be demonstrating that you are committed to following through on pledges, which will be invaluable in convincing others that we are committed to widespread cultural change. 

#### What happens if my circumstances change before my pledge activates? 
Academia is a turbulent industry, in these difficult times more than ever. We're not interested in punishing you for circumstances beyond your control, so if your situation changes before your pledge activates, just let us know and we'll remove your pledge. Just make sure to do this *prior* to your pledge activating, so that your pledge doesn't trigger other people's pledges before they have the level of community support they were expecting, or detract from our goal of demonstrating a commitment to action within our community.

#### How do I know that people will follow through on their pledges?
Unlike previous pledge campaigns (e.g., [Cost of Knowledge](http://thecostofknowledge.com/)), we plan to analyse and report when people have followed through on their pledges (e.g., using different colours to indicate completed/broken pledges). In the short term, this approach will provide accountability and motivation for people to uphold their pledges. Moreover, we plan to run a wide range of campaigns, across multiple sectors in academia, which will provide an increasing level of data about who upholds their pledges and under what circumstances. In the long term, we expect that this data will help us tailor campaigns with the highest chance of impact in the community and -- ultimately -- bolster confidence in our community's commitment to action.
