Hi @channel,

Do you ever feel like your open science efforts are just a drop in the ocean, or worry that practising open science might have a negative impact on your career? Project Free Our Knowledge aims to accelerate progress and mitigate conflicts between personal incentives and the collective good by organising collective action in academia. Researchers can anonymously pledge to adopt new, progressive behaviours if and when there is a pre-defined threshold of support in their community, thus protecting vulnerable researchers and building momentum for cultural change in academia. Our vision is to use collective action to help make open science the norm in academia -- but to achieve this aim we need your help! 

We're currently designing a range of new campaigns to be posted on the website in the coming months. These campaigns will all take a simple formula: "When X researchers have signed the campaign, they will do Y together". Anyone can propose a campaign or comment on those proposed by others, using the Issues feature in our Github repository (see posting guidelines here). We want this to be a community effort and to hear from as many diverse people as possible, and so would love it if members of this community could help us get the conversation started by commenting on existing proposals (including Registered Reports, preregistering studies, and withholding unpaid reviews from for-profit publishers), or posting a new campaign idea for something you are passionate about. If you don't feel comfortable commenting in the open, you can of course reach out to me and I would be happy to relay your comments in the thread anonymously.
 
Thanks everyone and please let me know if you have any questions. Looking forward to creating waves with you all :)
