Hi all,

Announcing the first of our new series of campaigns on Project Free Our Knowledge: the [Preregistration Pledge](https://freeourknowledge.org/2020-12-03-preregistration-pledge/)! This campaign asks you to pledge to preregister at least one study in the next two years, alongside 100 of your peers. We've been developing this campaign in collaboration with community members over the last few months, using our newly developed Github repository. It would mean the world if you could check out the [campaign page](https://freeourknowledge.org/2020-12-03-preregistration-pledge/) and -- if you can -- take the pledge. You won't have to act until 100 of your peers have signed the same pledge (but you can get started early, if you desire), so there's zero risk or effort required today beyond clicking a simple button. Then, after 100 people have signed, we'll let you know that your pledge has activated and give you 2 years to complete a single preregistration (if your circumstances have changed before that time, just contact us and we'll remove your pledge). We'll be tracking pledge compliance as we go and showing which pledges have been completed on the website, as a way to motivate others to complete their pledge and also to demonstrate that our community is committed to action. In time, this data will be the currency with which we can increase confidence that pledges will be acted upon, and hopefully feed into bigger and bolder campaigns that call for widespread systemic change in academia. 

If anyone has any questions, I'm happy to answer them here, but also feel free to post questions/comments using our (new!) comments feature at the bottom of the campaign page, so that others with similar concerns can find the discussion. I've also started a [Frequently Asked Questions](https://github.com/FreeOurKnowledge/website/blob/master/faq.md) document to collect broad questions relevant to the entire project, which is linked directly from the website, so also feel free to add/edit any questions there directly. 

Thanks everyone! 
